SP #033: FP8 Types
=================

We propose to add 8-bit floating-point ("FP8") types in Slang. These smaller
floating-point types could be used to accelerate many machine learning kernels.

Status
------

Status: Design Review

Implementation:

Author: Nicolas Celik

Reviewer:

Background
----------

The "FP8 Formats For Deep Learning" whitepaper
(https://arxiv.org/pdf/2209.05433) defines two 8-bit floating-point formats to
accelerate deep learning training and inference: E4M3 (4-bit exponent and 3-bit
mantissa) and E5M2 (5-bit exponent and 2-bit mantissa).

Slang currently does not support any FP8 types in the language. The
floating-point types currently defined in the language are `half`, `float`, and
`double`, which represent the `binary16`, `binary32`, and `binary64` formats
defined in IEEE 754, respectively.

However, E4M3 and E5M2 are already supported for cooperative vector operations
when targeting SPIR-V, HLSL, or OptiX. The `CoopVecComponentType` enum defined
in `hlsl.meta.slang` already contains cases named `FloatE4M3` and `FloatE5M2`,
and the following functions support `CoopVecComponentType::FloatE4M3` and
`CoopVecComponentType::FloatE5M2` as values for their `inputInterpretation`,
`matrixInterpretation`, and `biasInterpretation` parameters when targeting
SPIR-V, HLSL, or OptiX:

- `coopVecMatMul`
- `coopVecMatMulAdd`
- `coopVecMatMulAddPacked`
- `coopVecMatMulPacked`

This support is only possible because these functions simply wrap around SPIR-V
instructions, HLSL builtins, or OptiX functions, depending on the target. When
the target is other than SPIR-V, HLSL, or OptiX, pure Slang implementations of
these functions are used. Because E4M3 and E5M2 are not supported in the
language, these pure Slang implementations currently do not support
`CoopVecComponentType::FloatE4M3` or `CoopVecComponentType::FloatE5M2` being
passed for `matrixInterpretation` or `biasInterpretation`.

Note that cooperative vectors only use FP8 types for matrix-vector
multiplication, as input interpretation types (for conversion/quantization of
input vectors before the actual multiplication operation) and matrix
interpretation types (i.e., matrix element types). FP8 types are not supported
as cooperative vector element types in SPIR-V, HLSL, or OptiX.

FP8 types are, however, supported as cooperative matrix element types in SPIR-V.
Slang currently does not support creating FP8 cooperative matrices, as FP8
`CoopMat` types cannot be represented.

Related Work
------------

E4M3 and E5M2 have been implemented in the following relevant APIs, languages,
IRs, and ISAs:

- in **OptiX, Vulkan, and HLSL,** where they are only supported as
  component/element types for cooperative vectors and cooperative matrices,
- in the **CUDA Math API,** where they can only be used in conversion
  operations,
- in **PTX and SPIR-V,** where they can be used in memory (load/store)
  operations, conversion operations, and (cooperative) matrix multiply-add
  operations, as well as in cooperative vector operations in the case of SPIR-V.

Note that scalar arithmetic on FP8 types is not supported in any of these APIs
and languages.

The current state of GLSL is similar to Slang's: E4M3 and E5M2 are not supported
in the language, but the `GLSL_NV_cooperative_vector` extension defines
constants named `gl_ComponentTypeFloatE4M3NV` and `gl_ComponentTypeFloatE5M2NV`
which can be used for the interpretation parameters of the `coopVec*` functions.

On x86-64, Intel AVX10.2 introduces instructions to convert vectors between FP8
(E4M3 and E5M2) and FP16 (Slang `half`). Intel AMX introduces instructions to
compute the dot product of E4M3 and/or E5M2 vectors and accumulate it into an
FP32 (Slang `float`) vector.

On AArch64, Armv9.2 introduces optional Advanced SIMD (Neon), SVE2, and SME2
instructions for E4M3 and E5M2. These instructions only operate on vectors and
matrices.

C, C++, Metal/MSL, and WebGPU/WGSL currently do not support FP8 types.

Proposed Approach
-----------------

We propose to define two new floating-point types in the Slang language:
`FloatE4M3` and `FloatE5M2` (the "FP8 types"), representing E4M3 and E5M2
respectively. These types would initially be available only when targeting CUDA
or Vulkan (SPIR-V).

As FP8 types are mainly of interest for matrix operations in machine learning,
and there is no hardware support for general FP8 operations, we propose
restricted support for FP8 types compared to other floating-point types:

- Support for explicitly converting scalar values from and to FP8 types using
  constructors.
  - Support for `FloatE4M3(x)` and `FloatE5M2(x)`, where `x` is of any
    floating-point type, including FP8 types, or any integer type, or `bool`.
  - Support for `T(x)`, where `T` is of any non-FP8 floating-point type, or any
    integer type, or `bool`, and `x` is of any FP8 type.
- Support for FP8 types as `vector` element types.
- Support for FP8 types as `CoopMat` element types.
- Support for memory load and store functions, e.g., `coopMatLoad`, with FP8
  arguments.
- Support for `coopMatMulAdd` with one or more `CoopMat` arguments of FP8
  element type.
- No support for other arithmetic, comparison, or math operations on values of
  FP8 scalar, `vector`, or `CoopMat` type.
- No support for implicit conversion from and to FP8 types to other
  floating-point types.

Detailed Explanation
--------------------

We propose to define two new base types named `FloatE4M3` and `FloatE5M2` in
Slang. These exact names would be both the types' internal names in the C++
codebase and their struct type names in `core.meta.slang`. These types would
have a size of 1 byte and would be 1-byte aligned.

While existing base types do not require any capabilities, the struct
definitions for FP8 types in `core.meta.slang` would require either the `cuda`
capability, or a new capability that represents the SPIR-V `Float8EXT`
capability defined by the `SPV_EXT_float8` extension.

Unlike existing floating-point types, FP8 types would not implement any of the
following interfaces:

- `__BuiltinArithmeticType`
- `__BuiltinFloatingPointType`
- `__BuiltinRealType`
- `__BuiltinSignedArithmeticType`
- `IArithmetic`
- `IFloat`

The struct definitions for all existing base types in `core.meta.slang`
implement `__BuiltinType`. However, this interface currently enables functions
that emit SPIR-V instructions incompatible with FP8 types:

- The equality and inequality operators (`==`, `!=`) and functions (`eql`,
  `neq`), which map to SPIR-V Relational and Logical Instructions. CUDA's
  `cuda_fp8.h` does not define C++'s `operator==` or `operator!=` for FP8 types
  either.
- The `all` and `any` functions in `hlsl.meta.slang`, which map to SPIR-V
  Relational and Logical Instructions.
- The `subgroup*` functions in `core.meta.slang`, as well as the `Wave*` and
  `QuadRead*` functions in `hlsl.meta.slang`, which map to SPIR-V Non-Uniform
  Instructions.

We propose to define a new empty interface named `__BuiltinScalarType` and to
change these functions and operators to require this new interface instead. All
existing base types would implement `__BuiltinScalarType`.

As `CoopMat` currently requires the element type `T` to implement
`__BuiltinArithmeticType`, we propose to define a new empty interface named
`ICoopElement` and to change the definitions of `CoopMat`, and the related
`coopMat*` functions to require this new interface instead. All existing
floating-point and integer base types would implement `ICoopElement`.

FP8 types would only implement `__BuiltinType` and `ICoopElement`, and no other
interface.

The following documentation should be updated:

- Section "Scalar Types" of `docs/user-guide/02-conventional-features.md`
- Section "Floating-Point Types" of `docs/language-reference/04-types.md`

Alternatives Considered
-----------------------

None.
